Homework 2
================
Jinghan Zhang
September 24, 2020

## Problem 1

``` r
library(tidyverse)
```

    ## ── Attaching packages ─────────────────────────────────────────── tidyverse 1.3.0 ──

    ## ✓ ggplot2 3.3.2     ✓ purrr   0.3.4
    ## ✓ tibble  3.0.3     ✓ dplyr   1.0.2
    ## ✓ tidyr   1.1.2     ✓ stringr 1.4.0
    ## ✓ readr   1.3.1     ✓ forcats 0.5.0

    ## ── Conflicts ────────────────────────────────────────────── tidyverse_conflicts() ──
    ## x dplyr::filter() masks stats::filter()
    ## x dplyr::lag()    masks stats::lag()

``` r
library(readxl)
```

Read the Mr. Trashwheel dataset.

``` r
trashwheel_df <-
  read_xlsx("./data/Trash-Wheel-Collection-Totals-8-6-19.xlsx", 
    sheet = "Mr. Trash Wheel",
    range = cell_cols("A:N")) %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  drop_na(dumpster) %>%
  mutate(
    sports_balls = round(sports_balls),
    sport_balls = as.integer(sports_balls)
  )
```

Read precipitation data.

``` r
precip_2018 = 
  read_excel(
    "./data/Trash-Wheel-Collection-Totals-8-6-19.xlsx",
    sheet = "2018 Precipitation",
    skip =1
  ) %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  drop_na(month) %>%
  mutate(year = 2018) %>%
  relocate(year)

precip_2017 = 
  read_excel(
    "./data/Trash-Wheel-Collection-Totals-8-6-19.xlsx",
    sheet = "2017 Precipitation",
    skip =1
  ) %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  drop_na(month) %>%
  mutate(year = 2017) %>%
  relocate(year)

month_df = 
  tibble(
    month = 1:12,
    month_name = month.name
  ) 

precip_df = bind_rows(precip_2018, precip_2017) 
left_join(precip_df, month_df, by = "month") 
```

    ## # A tibble: 24 x 4
    ##     year month total month_name
    ##    <dbl> <dbl> <dbl> <chr>     
    ##  1  2018     1  0.94 January   
    ##  2  2018     2  4.8  February  
    ##  3  2018     3  2.69 March     
    ##  4  2018     4  4.69 April     
    ##  5  2018     5  9.27 May       
    ##  6  2018     6  4.77 June      
    ##  7  2018     7 10.2  July      
    ##  8  2018     8  6.45 August    
    ##  9  2018     9 10.5  September 
    ## 10  2018    10  2.12 October   
    ## # … with 14 more rows

This dataset contains information from the Mr. Trashwheel trash
collector in Baltimore, Maryland. As trash enters the inner harbor, the
trashwheel collects that trash, and stores it in a dumpster. The dataset
contains information on year, month, and trash collected, including some
specific types of trash. There are a total of 344 rows or observations
in our final dataset. Additional data sheets include month precipitation
data. The total precipitation in 2018 was 70.33 inches and there was a
median of 8 sports balls in a dumpster in 2017.

## Problem 2

Read and clean the data; retain line, station, name, station latitude /
longitude, routes served, entry, vending, entrance type, and ADA
compliance. Convert the entry variable from character (YES vs NO) to a
logical variable (the ifelse or recode function may be useful). Reformat
data so that route number and route name are distinct variables.

``` r
nyc_transit <- read_csv("./data/NYC_Transit_Subway_Entrance_And_Exit_Data.csv") %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  unite(route, route1, route2, route3, route4, route5, route6, route7, route8, route9, route10, route11, sep = "/", na.rm = TRUE) %>%
  select('line', 'station_name', 'station_latitude', 'station_longitude', 'route', 'entry', 'vending', 'entrance_type', 'ada') %>%
  mutate(entry = ifelse(entry == "YES", TRUE, FALSE))
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   .default = col_character(),
    ##   `Station Latitude` = col_double(),
    ##   `Station Longitude` = col_double(),
    ##   Route8 = col_double(),
    ##   Route9 = col_double(),
    ##   Route10 = col_double(),
    ##   Route11 = col_double(),
    ##   ADA = col_logical(),
    ##   `Free Crossover` = col_logical(),
    ##   `Entrance Latitude` = col_double(),
    ##   `Entrance Longitude` = col_double()
    ## )

    ## See spec(...) for full column specifications.

This dataset contains information about NYC’s subway entrances and
exits. Each row of the raw dataset refers to an individual station
entrance or exit. There are a total of 1868 rows or individual station
entrances/exits. The raw dataset includes 9 columns that detail the
line, station name, station longitude/latitude, routes, entrance type,
whether entry was allowed, presence of ticket vending, and whether it
was ADA compliant. The data has been cleaned, with extraneous variables
omitted and the entry variable converted from character to a logical
variable. The data is now fairly tidy, albeit with somewhat confusing
variable names. There are 456 distinct stations, with 58 stations
specifically serving the A train, and 17 of those stations are ADA
compliant. However, there are 79 total ADA compliant stations. 0.3770492
of the station entrances/exits without vending allow entrance.

## Problem 3

First, clean the data in pols-month.csv. Use separate() to break up the
variable mon into integer variables year, month, and day; replace month
number with month name; create a president variable taking values gop
and dem, and remove prez\_dem and prez\_gop; and remove the day
variable.

Second, clean the data in snp.csv using a similar process to the above.
For consistency across datasets, arrange according to year and month,
and organize so that year and month are the leading columns.

Third, tidy the unemployment data so that it can be merged with the
previous datasets. This process will involve switching from “wide” to
“long” format; ensuring that key variables have the same name; and
ensuring that key variables take the same values.

Join the datasets by merging snp into pols, and merging unemployment
into the result.

``` r
pols_month <- read_csv("./data/fivethirtyeight_datasets/pols-month.csv") %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  separate(mon, c("year", "month", "day"), sep="-") %>%
  mutate(month = recode(month,
    "01" = "January",
    "02" = "February",
    "03" = "March",
    "04" = "April",
    "05" = "May",
    "06" = "June",
    "07" = "July",
    "08" = "August",
    "09" = "September",
    "10" = "October",
    "11" = "November",
    "12" = "December",
  )) %>%
  mutate(president = ifelse(prez_dem == 1, "dem", "gop")) %>%
  select(-day, -prez_gop, -prez_dem)
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   mon = col_date(format = ""),
    ##   prez_gop = col_double(),
    ##   gov_gop = col_double(),
    ##   sen_gop = col_double(),
    ##   rep_gop = col_double(),
    ##   prez_dem = col_double(),
    ##   gov_dem = col_double(),
    ##   sen_dem = col_double(),
    ##   rep_dem = col_double()
    ## )

``` r
snp <- read_csv("./data/fivethirtyeight_datasets/snp.csv") %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  separate(date, c("month", "day", "year"), sep="/") %>%
  mutate(month = recode(month,
    "1" = "January",
    "2" = "February",
    "3" = "March",
    "4" = "April",
    "5" = "May",
    "6" = "June",
    "7" = "July",
    "8" = "August",
    "9" = "September",
    "10" = "October",
    "11" = "November",
    "12" = "December",
  )) %>%
  select(year, month, -day, close)
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   date = col_character(),
    ##   close = col_double()
    ## )

``` r
employment <- read_csv("./data/fivethirtyeight_datasets/unemployment.csv") %>%
  janitor::clean_names() %>%
  pivot_longer(!year, names_to = "month", values_to = "unemployment") %>%
  mutate(month = recode(month,
    "jan" = "January",
    "feb" = "February",
    "mar" = "March",
    "apr" = "April",
    "may" = "May",
    "jun" = "June",
    "jul" = "July",
    "aug" = "August",
    "sep" = "September",
    "oct" = "October",
    "nov" = "November",
    "dec" = "December",
  ))
```

    ## Parsed with column specification:
    ## cols(
    ##   Year = col_double(),
    ##   Jan = col_double(),
    ##   Feb = col_double(),
    ##   Mar = col_double(),
    ##   Apr = col_double(),
    ##   May = col_double(),
    ##   Jun = col_double(),
    ##   Jul = col_double(),
    ##   Aug = col_double(),
    ##   Sep = col_double(),
    ##   Oct = col_double(),
    ##   Nov = col_double(),
    ##   Dec = col_double()
    ## )

``` r
merged = merge(pols_month, snp) %>%
  merge(employment)
```

The first dataset pols\_month has 9 columns/variables, and 822
rows/observations. It gives the breakdown of political representatives
in the senate, house, governor, and presidential positions by republican
versus democratic party per month starting from 1947 to 2015. The actual
variables are named year, month, gov\_gop, sen\_gop, rep\_gop, gov\_dem,
sen\_dem, rep\_dem, president.

The second dataset snp has 3 columns/variables, and 787
rows/observations. It gives what appears to be monthly market closing
data starting from 2015 and then going back until 1950. The actual
variables are named year, month, close.

The third dataset unemployment has 3 columns/variables, and 816
rows/observations. It gives yearly unemployment data by month from 1948
to 2015. The actual variables are named year, month, unemployment.

The final dataset merged consists of 786 rows where each row is data for
a month, starting from 1950 and ending at 2015. The data has 11 columns
consisting of the variables: year, month, gov\_gop, sen\_gop, rep\_gop,
gov\_dem, sen\_dem, rep\_dem, president, close, unemployment.
